Bloomberg Audio Studios. Podcasts,
radio, news.
>> [music]
>> Hello and [music] welcome to another
episode of the Odd Lots podcast. I'm
Tracy Alloway. And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
Joe, up until recently, very recently, I
would say there are or were two
hypothetical blockades that kind of
loomed large in the minds of
geopolitical strategists everywhere. And
the first was, of course, Iran
blockading the Strait of Hormuz. That's
clearly not a hypothetical anymore. It's
actually happened. It's reality. And
we've been doing a lot of episodes about
it. And so, the big hypothetical
blockade that we're left with to to
ponder is China potentially doing
something with Taiwan. Definitely. And
you know, the only thing I would
actually flip them in the sense that I
would say the vast majority of discourse
has been about the latter, China
potentially blockading Taiwan in some
way. Um that was the thing that everyone
has been talking about for years and
years with growing intensity. And then,
of course, as you mentioned, now the
Hormuz situation, which sort of, I don't
know, hit people by their blind spot cuz
they didn't think it could ever really
happen or whatever really happen has
happened. But when this resolves, if
this resolves, etc., I believe the
question of Taiwan will
very quickly return to the fore. Oh,
absolutely. So, as you mentioned, it
obviously hasn't happened yet, but
people have been writing and thinking
about it for years and years and years.
And as you know, I consider myself an
expert on this topic, having once
written a paper in college saying that
China was going to invade Taiwan before
the 2008 Beijing Olympics. And that
obviously didn't happen. But being wrong
has never gotten the way of any pundit's
career.
>> that I would not worry about that. That
has never been an issue. As long as it
was as as it was well articulated
and shared some knowledge, etc., then
then you're fine. It was written from a
server closet while I was in Beijing.
So, it had that going for it. Um but
anyway, my point is that this is
something that's always sort of looming
in the background. And you always see
headlines kind of coming up that hint at
China-Taiwan tension. So, we actually
had one this morning. We're recording on
April 21st. The headline is Taiwan's
president canceled his visit to
Eswatini.
Do you know where that is? No. It's a
tiny, tiny, um place in Africa. Huh. Um
did they did they like, you know, it's
interesting cuz there's a few countries
still holding out there that recognize
Taipei as the unified capital of China.
Most of like
most of switch, there's a few random
ones out there that are still like they
were they they don't recognize the
mainland, etc. So, I'm all, you know,
all little factoids here and there. I
didn't know that. But um So, Taiwan's
president's office is citing air route
issues. I'm doing air quotes for those
who can't see this video. Uh and China
pressure. So,
>> Yeah. Um you do get those kind of
headlines every once in a while. And
then the one other thing I would say is
like, okay, the Strait of Hormuz, the
blockade there, clearly an oil story.
And oil is something that powers the
entire global economy.
But as we've kind of learned over the
past six or seven weeks, oil might not
actually be the thing that like powers
markets, right? If you think about
>> true. That's true. The thing that
matters for markets, it might be
something much closer to AI and
semiconductors and valuation, so
>> is cut right. That's
totally. I mean, evidently the world
could go a few weeks and not grind to a
halt if the Strait of Hormuz is closed
for a few weeks. I believe the reaction
in markets would be and just all around
the world and really everything would
just be orders of magnitude differently
if someone is like, "Oh, no, chips. No
chips are coming out." That would be
such a bigger deal. And of course, you
know, the question of, you know,
Taiwan's
role in the world, that would all
already have been a very big security
question even prior to the now constant
drumbeat obsession with AI chips, etc.
But it only magnifies why this is such a
live issue.
>> Right. So, apparently we can kind of
survive a few weeks without oil. Can we
survive a few weeks without an actual
computer or months?
>> of the a few weeks without a fraction of
the a certain fraction. The
whereas if we, you know, the chip flow
were to be disrupted on that level, it
would just be
yes, much bigger deal. All right. Well,
we do in fact have the perfect guest to
talk about all of this. Someone who has
just written a book on exactly this
topic called Defending Taiwan: A
Strategy to Prevent War with China.
We're going to be speaking with Ike
Freiman. He is also a Hoover fellow at
Stanford. So, Ike, thank you so much for
coming on Odd Lots. Thanks for having me
on. Here's my first question. You've
spent a lot of time in China, including
researching this book. Are you going to
be able to go back?
I think I could go back. The question is
whether I could leave. I'm I'm joking.
I'm joking. They gave me a hard time at
immigration on the way out last time.
And I can't do useful research there
anymore. It's not like there's archives
I can access, interviews I can do. So,
the value of it for research is going
down for me, but also the risk to my
person, the risk to my devices is going
up. You know, I do try to engage as much
as I can. But I think it's it it's
better to engage in third countries.
Why don't you tell us the the genesis of
this book or the origin of it or how you
got interested in in in this particular
topic? Well, my background is as a China
scholar looking at the China's global
investment campaign. My first book was
about the Belt and Road. And I looked at
a bunch of Chinese language sources that
show how it works under the hood as a
campaign
to mobilize the party-state behind Xi
Jinping.
And then I went on the trail of it to
Sri Lanka, to Tanzania, Greece,
Greenland, actually. I did my PhD about
China in Greenland uh trying to
understand how China leverages You did a
PhD about China in Greenland?
That is timely. Anyway, keep going.
That'll be another book.
But uh
what I learned in the process of doing
this book is that China has this
formidable toolkit for blending economic
power with its geopolitical objectives.
And you know, Taiwan was clearly
emerging during COVID as the AI story
was heating up
as this monumental issue in the
structure of the world economy, not just
for the old reasons that we care about
Taiwan, which is largely about
geography. So, it seemed to me reading
about this, China had more ships, more
planes, more missiles, more drones. What
was I missing? Why is the United States
not completely outmatched?
So, I started this project with a friend
of mine named Harry Halem, who's a
superstar naval historian.
And I asked him, "What's the book I
should read to understand what a
US-China war over Taiwan would be like,
what it would take to win, and then what
of those things the US can do or can't
do?"
And he said, "Well, that book doesn't
exist.
I can give you hundreds of articles,
hundreds of people to follow on Twitter,
but no one thing to read." And so, it
became this collaboration between two
historians, one focused on the
economics, one focused on the military,
to put the pieces together.
And as I did so, I began to discover
there's huge gaps in our knowledge of
this problem. This is the most complex,
multi-disciplinary,
multi-functional foreign policy problem
that American statecraft has ever faced.
Because it's a military problem. It's
also an industrial problem. It's a
technology policy problem. It's a
diplomatic problem, a real one, a
complex one,
for how we deal with China, with Taiwan,
and with the rest of the world. And then
finally, it's an economic problem. It's
a question of global economic order.
Because if Taiwan falls by force or
coercion, and China seizes the fabs, the
semiconductor fabs, or the fabs are
disabled or destroyed,
that is a hard reset of the entire
global economic system that we have had
since 1989 and arguably back to 1945.
So, what what comes next? And
while we have a lot of good thinking
about certain aspects of the scenario,
like the war-gaming of what an
amphibious campaign would look like and
how we stop it, there's other aspects
like the economic planning that we just
haven't done. So, that was the idea for
the book. Pull together the best of
existing knowledge, fill in the gaps
where we can based on interviews, based
on historical work, Chinese language
materials, and try to be the person to
put the pieces together. I want to back
way up for for a second and ask a very
obvious question, which is, why does
China actually care so much about
Taiwan? And then is it even accurate to
say like, why does China care about
Taiwan? Should I be asking, why does Xi
Jinping care about Taiwan?
Those are the two right questions to
ask, and it's where we start with the
book.
The first thing to understand is that
it's not about the chips for China.
The chips are a co-benefit, but China
cared about Taiwan long before they made
chips, and they would care about them if
they didn't make chips. Taiwan is the
unfinished business of of China's civil
war.
Uh in 1949,
as the Kuomintang, Chiang Kai-shek's
government, was losing control of
northern China, they began to evacuate
their forces alongside all the treasures
of the Imperial Palace to Taipei. And
they set up a government there,
essentially took over the island by
force, and became, over the course of
the Korean War, essentially a US ally.
In 1955, Eisenhower went to Taipei. They
became a critical node in the US
alliance architecture. Mao obviously
wanted to take this island. He wanted to
wipe out the remnants of his enemy.
And for him, the fact that there was
this other China
right across the strait, which at the
time enjoyed the Chinese seat in the UN
Security Council, was recognized by most
of the world as the one true China, this
was a fundamental question of the
legitimacy of the Chinese Communist
Party. And so, it became this totemic
propaganda point that we will liberate
Taiwan from the imperialists and in the
process we will make make China whole.
We will fix this historical wrong that
we were separated under this century of
humiliation and therefore for us to be
fully rejuvenated as a civilization,
Taiwan has to be brought to heel and the
world must accept. It's not just about
control of over Taiwan, it's about
political legitimacy. The United Nations
must accept, the United States must
accept that Taiwan is part of China and
there's only one China in the world and
the Communist Party is the only
legitimate government. So this is why
it's sensitive. It's not just about the
status of Taiwan. It's about what China
means.
And that has always been bound up in
competition with the United States.
Prior to the KMT having fled the
mainland, the civil war and all that,
what was understood to be the status of
that geography called Taiwan and how to
what degree going back even prior to the
civil war etc.,
what was its relationship to mainland
China? It depends how far back you want
to go. Back in the 17th century the
Dutch had a presence there.
Uh as the Ming empire was falling apart,
you had generals who came from the
mainland. They're claimed by both sides
now. You know, a couple of them became
gods actually and there's temples to
them in Taiwan. And essentially during
the Qing Dynasty, China's final dynasty,
they were a region of the province
across the street on the mainland.
>> Okay. But the Qing Dynasty's writ didn't
really run there. They were settled by
people from the mainland, but it was
swampy and pestilential and there were
indigenous people and it wasn't really
actively administered by the center. The
Qing pretty quickly lost control over
the fringes of their empire and then the
Japanese took it in the Sino-Japanese
War in 1895 and the Japanese developed
it. The Japanese industrialized, they
left a mark on it and unlike other
places that the Japanese colonized were
like Korea where their colonization was
brutal. In Taiwan they left relatively
good feelings.
So all through the first half of the
20th century when the communists and the
nationalists were fighting on the
mainland, Taiwan was under Japanese
control.
And then the question is after Japan
surrendered in 1945,
who did they surrender it to? Mhm. And
was the status of Taiwan decided after
Japan surrender? And the US position is
legally it remains unresolved. It
remains unresolved who Japan surrendered
it to. So the US position is we don't
actually take a view on what the true
status of Taiwan is. All right. This is
something for Taipei and Beijing to work
out between themselves.
And we are open to any outcome, but it
has to be done peacefully. So no no
force and no coercion and since Taiwan's
become a democracy, it has to be
democratically acceptable to the people
of Taiwan. And that's a principled
position which is really about the
stability of the broader region because
it recognizes that this region is held
together
through trade routes that go through
international waters, international
airspace. It's been stable since 1945.
And if the United States starts allowing
borders to be changed by force, trade
routes to be changed by force,
very quickly the whole regional order in
this in this part of the world will
collapse
and this is a grave economic danger for
the United States. It's a geopolitical
danger. So that's the view. Yeah. And
unfortunately what China's doing is
they're trying to revise that situation
by pushing in the gray zone, pushing
through coercion and there's obviously
always the risk they could escalate to
war. I want to talk more about that, but
just on the topic of I guess US policy
towards China and you already touched on
the one China policy, but what exactly
is strategic ambiguity? Because whenever
I hear that term, I always think it's
like
it's what I would do if I was trying to
get out of a social commitment later
that evening or something like, oh,
maybe I'll come. Maybe, you know, we'll
see. We'll see what happens. What
exactly does that mean? And isn't it
weird that people recognize that as an
actual policy, strategic ambiguity? What
does it mean? So the whole policy is
sort of strange because
it was never put forward by one person.
It emerged through accretion.
So it's like seeing a hundred bottles of
beer on the wall. Like you keep adding a
new lyric every time there's a new
administration. So what is the
components of the one China policy?
Well, there's three community case,
three agreements that the United States
signed with China between the '70s and
the '80s and those are the political
foundation of our relationship with the
PRC.
And the language is vague and there's
some key phrases that are translated
differently in English and Chinese. So
we get to claim that the other side said
things that the other side says it
doesn't say. There's a whole lot of
that. Uh
but basically the United States position
is we will have a relationship with the
PRC. We will treat Beijing as the sole
legitimate government of China, but we
will maintain for all practical purposes
an informal relationship with Taiwan as
if it were a country
just not technically,
not de jure.
And this has been
reaffirmed by Congress which in 1979
passed the Taiwan Relations Act that
makes very clear that it's the sense of
Congress that we should treat Taiwan as
a state in basically every respect
except for these some of these formal,
very high-end political and military
interactions. And then in the Reagan
administration, we made some extra
commitments to Taiwan called the Six
Assurances and they basically reduced to
we will not force you to the negotiating
table. We will not trade you away. In
other words, you will never face
pressure from us to take a bad deal.
Mhm. And what this policy adds up to has
been called by political scientists dual
deterrence.
We want to deter Taiwan from declaring
independence or doing something
provocative that might trigger a crisis
and we want to persuade Beijing that if
it intervenes, it might face a
devastating reaction, but that they
don't have to worry because Taiwan is
also deterred, so they can take their
time and hopefully if we deter both
sides from doing something extreme, we
can encourage them
to resolve their differences peacefully.
So that strategic ambiguity is the not
saying exactly what we would do or under
what circumstances.
The tricky thing is that was a great
policy when we had overwhelming
economic, technological and military
advantages.
That is no longer the case. We probably
could defeat China in a high-end
conventional war
and we can go into why.
If we put sanctions on China, we could
probably cause a greater GDP hit in
China
and we can go into why,
but the cost to us and the risk to us as
Americans is just going up up up as the
relative balance shifts. And so now it
increasingly seems like it's a get out
of jail free card even if it isn't.
Quick question. I know basically nothing
about Taiwanese domestic politics. Am I
wrong though? I feel like I read
somewhere it's like
the KMT, the success they and they were
the revolutionaries.
Aren't they the more dovish of the
parties in relations with Beijing and
don't aren't they the party that seems
to be a little bit softening of the
stances of the future and maybe, you
know, uniting the two sides a little
bit. Am I wrong about that?
>> No, that that's absolutely How is that
possible?
>> It's
How nerdy do you want to get? So here's
the thing.
I I mentioned that the dispute is
largely about what China means.
Now that question continues. The
Kuomintang, the KMT, which is the
successor of uh Chiang Kai-shek's party,
they believe that they're still the
legitimate representatives of the true
China. The entire thing. Well, they
recognize that there's a free China and
an unfree China. Okay. And I think
they've long since given up their
aspirations of raising an army and going
back across the strait and taking over
the mainland, but I think they have an
aspiration that one day
this this divided China can be unified
either in some kind of confederation
structure or who knows, maybe with the
KMT on top.
And they identify culturally,
historically, civilizationally as
Chinese. Yeah. They say we we're
Chinese, we just happen to live on
Taiwan, but we're one civilization, one
nation.
And the KMT's point of view is that we
one China respective interpretations.
And on that basis, Beijing is willing to
talk to them
because they disagree about one China
mean what one China means, but they both
believe in principle that there is only
one China in the world and Taiwan's part
of it.
But the current ruling party in Taiwan,
the Democratic Progressive Party or the
DPP,
they have a different perspective. They
say we are a country called Taiwan.
We're one of the most technologically
advanced places in the world. We are a
thriving democracy. The world needs our
chips.
You know, we are at the center of this
security architecture. So they just see
themselves as a distinct nation.
>> We are a distinct nation and we should
be recognized by the world as such and
they're not
suicidal. They're not crazy. They
recognize that if they declare
independence, that this could bring the
hammer down on them.
But their point of view is we will never
declare independence because we already
are.
And Americans I think will about to have
to learn this lesson because Taiwan is
going into a presidential campaign
and it is far from clear
where the wind is blowing.
And the United States will have to work
with
whoever wins because that's what it
means to have a partner that's a
democracy. But these two parties have
very different points of view and one of
the points I make in the book is we need
to learn to handle Taiwan's domestic
politics. We are two democracies respond
to one another. For example, I think the
KMT, if they come back to power, will be
much less interested in helping America
reshore chip production.
And they're also probably much less
interested in doing military cooperation
with the United States if that's going
to inflame China.
I I I think basically you can think
about it this way. The DPP believes that
the relationship with the United States
is the most important thing.
That we matter to them just as they
matter to us and that if Taiwan gets in
trouble, America will come.
And the KMT
views are diverse, but they tend to have
the view
the cavalry might not be coming.
The Americans might be using us as a
pawn in a bigger geopolitical game, but
can we really trust them?
And we don't want to become Ukraine.
So maybe the best approach is to
negotiate.
And these are two very different points
of view. They're both Yeah. Plausible
interpretations of the facts and the
United States has to learn to deal with
both sides. I want to ask you more about
reshoring, but since we're on the topic
of domestic Taiwanese politics, one
thing I've always wondered and I'm
curious if you maybe got some color on
this in the course of your research, but
one of the reasons, it's not the only
reason, but a big one, one of the
reasons Taiwan is strategically
important is because of the
semiconductor business and the presence
of TSMC and companies like that.
What role does a TMC play in Taiwanese
domestic politics? Like are there actual
instances of like
semiconductor companies having a seat at
the table when it comes to formulating
national security policy or indirect
influence or anything like that? Have
you seen examples? It's hugely, hugely
important. It's only a couple of
percent, the semiconductor industry,
depending on how you define it, with
related services industries. It's
something like 5% of employment in
Taiwan.
But it's an outsize share of Taiwan's
exports. Yeah. And right now
just if you look at the macro data,
Taiwan's exports are booming because no
one can get enough of their chips.
There is an entire ecosystem of
universities, vocational training
centers, companies that supply to TSMC.
This is a national champion in so many
ways and they get tax benefits and
subsidized land and Taiwan's political
economy is organized around making them
a success just as
South Korea's has been organized around
making Samsung and others a success.
TSMC is smart enough to know that it has
to deal with it administrations of both
parties. But TSMC is also caught in a
US-China tension, too.
And TSMC doesn't share the United States
political objectives here. TSMC is happy
to sell to China. They don't have a
problem if China buys lots of their
chips. But they have to work with the
United States because ultimately they
are fabricating chips at the high end
that are made with US designs. So the US
does have the ability to export control
where those final products go. This is
really interesting and important and I
hadn't thought about this dynamic. I
mean, I guess it sort of makes sense to
me that like if I were like the
leadership in Taiwan, I don't know if I
would be like that thrilled about our
main company
opening up fabs in Arizona, etc. But I
guess it sort of makes sense like okay,
you know, we the US is a pretty
important partner. But what I'm
wondering, you know, like in a future
scenario, so going back to Reagan and
it's like we're not there's doctrine,
we're never going to put pressure on you
to like accept a bad deal. What if over
time organically
a new generation of sort of more
sympathetic like
main
mainland voters like they grow up, they
look at the world, they see maybe the US
sort of looks like a belligerent power
sometimes, etc. They look at China and
it seems looks like they're doing a lot
better. They're not as poor as they used
to be. They look pretty stable, etc.
Like could Taiwan just sort of
migrate closer to the Chinese sphere or
perhaps even merge back into China
organically? Yes, and that is
>> that a is that something that like US
policy like feel like do we feel that we
have to prevent that if that's sort of
where the democratic action in Taiwan
goes?
>> Well, our long-standing policy is that
it's the it's the right of the people of
Taiwan to decide their own future. And
that's a principled position that we
hold for a reason that is also
self-interested. Which is if Taiwan
decides that they want to submit or they
want to take a deal and they want to
unify with the mainland. By the way, the
mainland uses this term reunification.
That's a weasel word. Taiwan has never
been subject to the People's Republic of
China in its history. But if Taiwan
becomes unified as part of China, what's
the United States going to go in? What
what are we going to go in and topple
the government? We're going to tell them
no? That
they should have self-determination to
decide. And that is one reason why it's
a no-brainer
to
start to build a semiconductor
manufacturing base in the United States
and Japan and other allied countries
because there's any number of reasons to
doubt whether we have assured access in
the long term to Taiwan's chip supply.
And if this is the most essential
bottleneck to the development of
frontier AI,
then we cannot put all of our eggs in
that basket.
>> Do we know like younger Taiwan? Is there
a reason to think that like I don't
know. I have again, I haven't looked at
polling of like how Chinese voters under
25 What do we know about them? What do
we know about them? What do we know
about them?
>> So the younger Taiwanese tend to lean
more towards the DPP historically. They
tend to In polls, they tend to identify
as I'm Taiwanese only Okay. rather Very
few of them will say I'm Chinese only.
>> Okay. More of them will an increasing
number will say that I'm Taiwanese only,
although many will say I'm both
Taiwanese and Chinese.
>> Okay.
Chinese in the sense of culturally,
civilizationally Chinese, not Chinese in
the sense of People's Republic of China
Chinese.
And I think
these dynamics are affected by what the
mainland does.
China is I think perfectly happy, Xi
Jinping would be perfectly happy if
Taiwan would sign a piece of paper that
says I accept one country, two systems
Taiwan plan.
Which is to say I accept your principle
that there's only one China and we're
part of it and you're the legitimate
leaders and we will get a Hong Kong
style arrangement where we get to keep
our laws, our institutions, our
democracy. We get some freedom of
expression, freedom to organize. We we
have our get our fancy passports that
have visa-free access to all these
countries, all these perks. And maybe
Beijing will give them
free energy, so other subsidies, other
perks.
That is the offer that's on the table
for Taiwan.
But it's become a whole less lot less
attractive now that Taiwan has watched
what happened to Hong Kong because Hong
Kong took that deal
and it was all right until people in
Hong Kong started to object to the CCP's
encroachment on their institutions and
their freedom to organize and speak out.
And what ended up happening is Xi
Jinping sent in masked thugs that
brutalized people, rounded them up, you
know, disappeared people in the night,
terrorized the population and crushed
them into submission. So I think Taiwan
has understood since 2019
that if they take one country, two
systems, it's the slow beginning of the
end of their democratic institutions and
their freedom. It is not a is not a deal
that they would take, I think,
willingly.
But if they feel that the United States
and the rest of the world isn't backing
them up
and their offer their Beijing
essentially says, you want to do this
the easy way or the hard way.
I can imagine a world in which they
choose the easy way.
And this matters because we're not just
talking about peacetime. We're also
talking about crisis scenarios.
There's all kinds of things that China
can do to dial up the pressure.
They can mobilize their forces in the
Taiwan Strait for a potential invasion.
Oh, it's just an exercise. It's just an
exercise until it's not.
They can start to curtail the flow of
goods and planes coming to and from
Taiwan. They can start to ask for
manifests. Who's on the plane? Oh, so
sorry. Ike is on the plane. Could you
make a pit stop in Shanghai? We want to
ask him some questions.
There's so many ways that Beijing can
turn up the pressure. They probably have
special forces United Front people on
the ground in Taiwan.
They can do cyber attacks against Taiwan
critical infrastructure. They can
blanket the country with propaganda
the island with rather with propaganda.
There's so much things that China can do
to put the pressure on and try to drive
wedges between Taiwan and the United
States and Japan.
And in those moments,
what is the US political strategy? Yeah,
we have a military strategy if they turn
to an invasion, but what is the
political strategy if the markets start
to panic? If we think we may need to get
our American citizens out. And these are
the scenarios I argue in the book that
we haven't yet fully thought through.
In your framework, what's been the big
constraint on Xi Jinping so far
historically? Like why hasn't he done
something on Taiwan yet?
Well, we don't know. We have to
speculate. One reason is that the
People's Liberation Army, the PLA,
I think it's fair to say up until
recently and probably still now lacks
the ability to take and hold Taiwan by
force.
Back in 1949, after Mao took over the
mainland, the first thing he did was he
told his generals, now give me the plan
to take Taiwan.
And they studied it and they concluded,
"Sir, it can't be done." This is one of
the hardest waterways in the world.
There's crazy tides. There's enormous
waves. There's 50 mile an hour winds.
There's typhoons. There's fog.
And there's only a few landing beaches
that are plausible and Taiwan knows what
those are. And now they have spent the
better part of a century fortifying
them. So if you want to get all of your
men across the strait, you have to
deliver them by sea or by air.
And air is difficult as Ukraine has
shown. It's easy to shoot down
helicopters and planes. And so you need
to take them in these amphibious ships
which can be sunk by mines or cheap
drones or artillery. And then
you have to get them into the shores,
and then you potentially have to sustain
them for a long period of time. You need
to give them uh vehicles and ammo and
fuel and food and medicine. And
what happens if you successfully deliver
15,000 troops to the shores
and then your logistics tail gets cut
because a number of your amphibious
ships end up on the bottom of the Taiwan
Strait. And then your men are massacred
on the beaches.
So many things have to go right
in a highly synchronized way for an
amphibious invasion to work, such that
D-Day, which is the great example in
history where we had all these
advantages that China
wouldn't have today.
Very, very almost it came very, very
close to going completely off the rails,
as I discussed in the book. So, Xi
Jinping is systematically building the
capabilities he would need.
He's building out this amphibious fleet.
He's building better anti-submarine
warfare to force us back. He's building
longer-range ballistic missiles that can
target ships to force our aircraft
carriers to stay further back from the
conflict zone. He's building out his air
force and drones, cyber tools, all these
things to coerce Taiwan.
But if you rolled the dice on an
invasion today,
I think, at least if you look at the
public war games, uh it is possible that
he would suffer a pretty catastrophic
defeat. So, that's one reason for
patience.
But as his preparations proceed, I think
he's getting more confident. So, one of
the things you used to hear a lot more,
and I don't think you hear it nearly as
much nowadays, but this idea of economic
pain, right? If China invaded Taiwan,
there would be some sort of retaliation,
maybe sanctions, something like that.
And because the CCP had built its
legitimacy on the social compact with
its population, which was basically, you
know, we're in power and in exchange you
all hopefully get rich, that was just
untenable for for Xi Jinping and other
policy makers.
You don't hear that that much anymore.
And I wonder I wonder why that is. Is it
just because like people feel that China
has reached the level of economic
development where like, okay, the
legitimacy has been established in terms
of the social compact, or is it because
we had an example of Russia invading
Ukraine and very obviously being willing
to trade off that military action
even though it generated an enormous
amount of economic pain for the country.
It's a whole bunch of factors at once.
Xi Jinping has overseen a transformation
in the social contract in China.
From development to ideology and
national security.
From the anti-corruption campaign to his
ideological rectification campaigns
to rewriting the history textbooks
to taking Communist Party cadres to
historical sites to study points of
hardship in party history.
>> Yeah. Uh Xi Jinping uses this term
struggle
to describe what the party should do.
And he has told young people they can't
find work that they should eat
bitterness.
The idea being you should tough it out.
We are a nation striving for national
rejuvenation. National rejuvenation
means rising to the height of human
achievement in every human endeavor. And
to do that, we're going to work hard and
we're going to make some sacrifices.
And he has tightened surveillance. He
has tightened discipline that allows him
to run this regime according to a very
different set of rules through coercion.
And that means we have to assume that
China's tolerance for economic pain has
increased.
Now, at some point there's a limit.
If the financial system were just to
implode
under the threat under the threat of
sanctions or because there's just mass
capital flight, because no investor
wants to be stuck in illiquid assets in
China if the US and China are headed to
war,
yes, there's possible that China could
suffer a sudden,
you know, black swan collapse. But I
think that's not base case. And I have a
work that I describe in a lot of detail
in the book about how over the last 10
years, China has been systematically
building shock absorbers into its
financial system to make it more likely
to
survive the gut punch of the imposition
of sanctions. And the fact that Russia's
financial system
which had
many it lacked many of these advantages
>> Yeah. was able to steady itself
>> [snorts]
>> after the imposition of sanctions is I
think an encouraging sign. Just a couple
of numbers to bring us home. At the
beginning of the Russia-Ukraine war,
Russia was blindsided that the Europeans
joined all the sanctions. They had moved
a lot of their central bank assets from
dollars into euros. And then the
Europeans froze those assets, which
meant suddenly half of their foreign
exchange reserves were just inaccessible
to them.
That was a huge boo-boo for the
Russians.
And then the sanctions regime targeted
uh Sberbank and other major banks in
ways that had not been expected. So, the
ruble lost something like half of its
value in a couple of weeks.
And
there was a real risk of Russian
collapse. But with only 300 billion
dollars of foreign exchange available,
they were able to right the ship
because they limited
they imposed a capital control regime.
They limited outflows from banks. They
raised interest rates to 20%. They
demanded that state enterprises take
payments in rubles. All of these things
to increase demand for rubles and keep
the banks solvent. And then
you know, foreign hedge funds that had
profited on the ruble short
took a look at the situation and they
said, "Well, are there more sanctions
coming?"
Well, if the answer is no, then it's all
priced in and the ruble looks pretty
cheap because actually Russia's imports
have just collapsed and their exports
are booming because the oil price is up.
And then in April of 2022, the ruble was
the best-performing currency in the
world.
And then the ship was steadied and then
it the economic war became an
attritional contest that we have not won
yet.
And I think there is a similar dynamic
with China. There is some possibility
that their financial system could
implode, but China, if you count their
shadow reserves, has between between 10
and 20 times the FX that was available
to Russia. They have an existing capital
control regime. All the banks are run by
the state.
And if they survive that gut punch,
they have the stockpiles to live on
their own supply for many, many, many
months if they're entirely cut off from
imports.
So, the question is, if we can't defeat
them economically slowly,
how do we think about the long-term
contest of economic pain such that it is
something that we as a coalition of
democracies can possibly win?
And the answer I come to in the book is
we have to stop thinking about it as
punishment. Stop thinking about it how
we could hurt China in a way that hurt
us, too. We need to think about what are
the things that we would want to do in
our own best interest in a crisis to
secure our own economic interests that
would just happen to hurt China as a
byproduct.
>> [music]
>> Just real quickly on cutting off
imports, are they good on oil? For like
this is we know they have this big oil
stockpile. War would be extremely
oil-intensive process.
You know, they've electrified a lot of
cars. I doubt their military is nearly
as I think they're good I think they're
good on oil.
>> You think they're good on oil?
>> So, they in peacetime, Yeah. they
consume, what is it, 13, 14 million
barrels a day, of which around four
are produced domestically. If they
became cost insensitive, which they
would be in a in a crisis,
>> they could probably squeeze that up a
bit. They also can import overland. They
import, you know, a couple of million
barrels a day overland. And if they had
to, they could import more by land.
Yeah. Okay.
>> be comfortable. It wouldn't be cheap,
but if they would have willingness to
pay, they have plenty of foreign
exchange. They could also do as the
Nazis did, which is turn coal into fuel
oil.
>> Yeah. Fischer-Tropsch, it's been done in
the past. The Nazis declared war on all
their oil suppliers and they still
managed to fight through 1945 pretty
effectively.
But there's more to this. They've got
They declare, what is it, 1.3 billion
barrels in their SPR? They probably have
something more like two.
And then they can make the civilian
economy ration. The PLA would use
something like 500,000 barrels a day.
So, if you run the math, and I just do
the back of the envelope in the book,
what matters is not that they would run
out of oil eventually. At some point
they would feel the squeeze. But our
allies, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan,
would feel the squeeze much faster.
So,
our coalition
as currently set up, doesn't have the
advantage in a long-term contest of
extreme economic war.
And it's not just about oil, it's about
everything else. They have stockpiles of
cotton. They have stockpiles of chips.
They have stockpiles of everything
plausible that they might need. Taiwan
doesn't have that. Japan doesn't have
that.
So, this is the risk that they take us
up to the brink. We are forced to
contemplate what the long-term economic
war looks like. We realize that if they
can last for 12 months and we can last
for three, that's not a game we want to
play and we fold.
And then if that is established, they
can coerce us. And this is not just
about Taiwan. This goes far, far, far
beyond Taiwan. This is about our entire
alliance architecture in the region. And
frankly, this is about our hemisphere,
too. One of the arguments you make in
the book is this idea that a US policy
response can't just be about military
power. It has to be about economic power
as well. And you talk about this idea of
avalanche decoupling. So, sort of
forming a grand alliance with other
democracies to try to isolate China from
the global economy.
And when I hear a term like avalanche
decoupling, I kind of think like, well,
in some respects the US and maybe some
other parts of the world have been
trying to decouple from China for a long
time with
varied degrees of success. What
convinces you that something
like that would be possible in a crisis
moment, especially when we're talking
about, again, grand alliances with
democracies that maybe under the Trump
administration, we don't seem to have
the best of relations with at the
moment. It's a really important
question. So, let's let's take the hard
facts head-on. In the last couple of
years, we have learned some very
important things about what is and is
not possible when it comes to breaking
our critical dependencies on China.
Everyone knows that we have these
dependencies which strike at the very
heart of our lives and livelihoods. We
depend on China for the active
pharmaceutical ingredients to save lives
every day in hospitals. We depend China
on the supply chain to build any drone
in the United States.
We depend China on China for legacy
chips, without which we can't make cars.
There is no Ford. There is no
Stellantis.
I think that's crazy.
I think it's crazy. I think it opens up
the United States to block economic
blackmail. And frankly, the fact that
our allies have the same dependencies
opens them up to blackmail, too.
So, it's a no-brainer
that we should start to break these
dependencies on China in the same way
that China is trying to break its
dependencies on us
because they don't want to be
blackmailed. So, what is dangerous is
that China would be able to de-risk
their economy largely from ours, but we
couldn't do that in a symmetrical way.
But, if a crisis happens over Taiwan,
whether that's tomorrow or 18 months
from now or 5 years from now,
it will be an oh, shoot. I guess we
should have done all of that 5 years
ago.
But, that will be yesterday's problem.
And the question for today's problem is,
how do we deal with the situation we
face?
And it's very possible that that
situation would be in the context of a
crushing recession and stock market
correction because, as we mentioned at
the beginning of this conversation,
the whole equity market is being held up
by an AI trade where seven tech
companies
that are priced for perfection
uh make up 40% of the S&P.
And if you take away the supply of
chips, they fall to earth.
$600 billion is that the number of the
hyperscalers are spending on data
centers this year? It's close enough.
You take that away and the US economy is
in recession. So,
imagine the context of a terrifying
stock market correction and and heading
into recession.
Let's assume that we
China has taken some actions that reveal
that we really need to expand this
de-risking or partial decoupling thing.
But, we've also learned that we can't
decouple from China all at once because
we tried this on Liberation Day and we
got cold feet within a week because the
bond market blew up and all the captains
of industry called up the president and
said, you have to reverse this, Mr.
President, or we're cooked.
So, if you can't decouple from China all
at once and quickly, the only way to do
it
is gradually
looking at the critical stuff first and
the non-critical stuff later if ever.
So, what I want to do is say, what is
the most critical things? If you have to
stack rank our dependencies, what's 99th
percentile, what's 90th, what's 70th,
what's 50th? And then let's go down the
list one at a time and figure out how do
we break these dependencies. So, in in
the event of a crisis,
an invasion of Taiwan or a blockade of
Taiwan or some
gray zone ambiguous thing, if we decide
we need to reset this relationship and
we need to decouple from China 5%, 10%,
30%,
what does that actually entail?
And I would submit that that's a much
harder problem than we've realized
because even if we want to decouple just
a little bit,
we face a transshipment problem.
Right now, as we've discovered, you have
a tariff differential on China. The
tariff on China is here, the tariff on
Vietnam, Mexico, everyone else is here.
So, companies will export their stuff
from China to Vietnam or Mexico. They'll
write made in Vietnam or Mexico on it
and they'll resend it to us.
So, if you don't develop a solution to
this transshipment problem,
there is no way that you can decouple
from China
even a little bit,
even in a crisis.
That to me is very scary.
And the process of working with other
countries to address this, essentially
this is rules of origin for trade.
This is a big enterprise that is going
to take years and years to do. It cannot
be done right away. So, what we're
talking about with avalanche decoupling
is a process that that abandons the
fiction that we can do this all at once
and starts thinking about if we need to
divorce China 10%, 30%, 60%, whatever it
is, how do we go about building a new
kind of economic order such that we can
still have trading relations with the
rest of the world? And that question has
not been addressed until this book. I
find this conversation to be like very
alarming and, you know,
obviously, and it should be a very
alarming. I guess the good news, if
there is any, is that we have spent the
last year several years deepening our
friendships with the rest of the world.
Also,
>> building up our allies and establishing
that open non-China trading block. At
least we're Oh, wait. No, we're
literally we're literally doing the
opposite, right?
>> Well, I was going to say, on the plus
side, if one of the one of the elements
of China deterrence is building a better
customs system where we can actually
track transshipments, then maybe maybe
some of that work has been done. It's
better than like building more nukes.
>> But, like it does seem like we're kind
of not doing any of this, right? I mean,
we're totally not doing any of this.
Correct. We are like rowing like if the
like
Yeah. If the goal is let's do this
avalanche decoupling around the world,
etc. Like we're going in the opposite
direction. Yeah, that's exactly that's
exactly right. The only way you can get
this stuff done is if you work with your
partners.
That's the only way. Yeah. And
that's not about being moralistic. It's
about practically speaking, there's
stuff that we don't know how to make in
this country anymore because we
outsourced it two generations ago and
there literally aren't any people left
who know how it's done.
And Japan or South Korea
in particular, but many of our European
partners, too, have this know-how in
advanced manufacturing. And not to
partner with them, I think is kind of
crazy.
Also, they face the same problems, the
same risks of economic coercion by
China. Yeah. And they have even less
leverage to put back push back against
China because China, relatively
speaking, is much bigger than they are.
So,
I think the Trump administration has a
few correct ideas dealing with these
rules of origin through these bilateral
deals.
>> Yeah. Doing bilateral economic security
pacts like with Japan, but we need to be
bringing larger groups of allies and
partners together to do this. Just real
quickly, I think you mentioned at the
beginning that you actually think
currently in a conventional war
that the American military would have
the upper hand. I don't, but like, you
know, it looks like
I don't know what's going to go on with
Iran and I'm very susceptible. I will
watch all the Chinese propaganda. I
watch the military praise like, that
looks really impressive. The robot dogs
and all this stuff. I'm pretty Oh, the
robot dogs. Yeah, like can you just give
me the short version of why as of April
21st, 2026, you think the US military
still has the upper hand? This is
something I learned in the process of
working on this book and then the
previous book, this is a companion book
called The Arsenal of Democracy,
>> Uh-huh. which is all of the military
nuts and bolts that my editor was like,
no way you're putting this in. This
that's too nerdy. But, what here's what
I discovered in researching that book.
The wars that America has fought over
the last 80 years have been land wars.
And land war has a certain character.
And war at sea has a totally different
character.
And the basic reason is that war on land
involves lots and lots and lots of units
that are basically interchangeable.
And so, it's attritional.
You're wearing each other down. You're
fighting along a long line. You're
applying pressure and there's an
equilibrium and a balance and you're
basically trying to hold up enough
reserves with potential energy to punch
through the enemy's line
and then send in the cavalry and their
line collapses and you ride to victory.
So, if you look at the maps of World War
I, for example, the line doesn't move.
It doesn't move. It doesn't move. It
doesn't move and then it breaks.
War at sea is different. You have a very
small number a much smaller number of
platforms and they're much more
specialized.
And so, if you can take out just one or
two of the enemy's vessels, specialized
aircraft, specialized ships, the whole
uh structure starts to collapse.
And the rest become easier to kill.
And that means that there's no real
incentive to hold back reserves.
Once the engagement starts, it's
incredibly intense and it's often
decided in the first hours to days.
And one significant implication of that
is your ability to see and communicate
across the battle space is really,
really critical. And especially as our
the range of our missiles and our drones
has increased,
that means that US
aircraft and ships and submarines that
could potentially strike targets in or
around China
can be zooming around across literally
millions of square miles of ocean.
So, to see these things, to target them,
and then to deliver mass to a target to
kill them is no easy feat. And if the US
can use cyber, counterspace
capabilities, and so on to disrupt
China's ability to see and communicate
in those critical early hours, then it
could potentially win a lopsided victory
or vice versa.
And one of the implications of that is
if you're just counting ships or
counting planes or missiles, you will
miss the parts of the balance that are
most important, that are actually
qualitative, many of which can be
augmented with AI.
And this is hard because it means when
you're wargaming these things,
if you're don't have a clearance,
you kind of have to make it up with
these capabilities. We don't know what
the cutting edge of cyber is, for
example. Only a very small compartmented
group of people within the national
security establishment know all of the
relevant capabilities.
But, I I would I just think that if
China believed that they could defeat
the US in a high-end war,
they would be behaving more assertively.
They would be operating not just in the
Taiwan Strait, but all around the region
in a way that they're not yet.
We started this conversation talking
about, you know, the famous hypothetical
blockades um in geopolitics and
international relations classrooms
around the world. Um what's your big
takeaway from the Strait of Hormuz
situation as it applies potentially to
China and Taiwan? It's a good wrap-up
for the conversation, really. It's the
United States military has these
god-like capabilities with special
forces, with cyber, electronic warfare,
in some senses the way our air defenses
have performed, which is exceptionally
exceptionally well.
But, while our military is very good at
doing the operational military stuff,
we are not succeeding at the strategic
level.
Because ultimately, war is the
continuation of politics by other means.
And our politics is susceptible to
economic pressure in a way that our
adversaries is not.
And if we don't
if we don't get the message, if we don't
take the wake-up call,
and start working on our economic
resilience and our credible ability to
bear economic pain and supply chain
disruptions and the rest,
we will be unprepared on exam day.
Because China has so many more
capabilities
to impose economic pain on us and to
micro-calibrate
the character of that economic pain than
Iran does.
And they have more ability to do it for
a long period of time in multiple
theaters and parts of the world.
And we can only deal with this problem
if we treat it as it all of government
interdepartmental problem, not just a
military problem.
And if we work with allies, and if we
try to make some kind of bipartisan
consensus that national economic
resilience matters.
That to me is the lesson of Hormuz. All
right. On that cheerful note, Ike
Freiman, thank you so much for coming on
Odd Lots. And the book is Defending
Taiwan: A Strategy to Prevent War with
China. Really appreciate it. Thanks so
much for having me on. Thanks so much,
Ike. That was great.
>> [music]
>> Joe, that was a fascinating
conversation. Um and I I haven't read
the entire book, but I did flip through
it and I I do recommend it. It's super
interesting. There's also like some
really interesting appendices with
speeches from various Taiwan
>> Uh yeah, I'm going to have to yeah.
>> Yeah. It's definitely worth reading. One
of the things that stood out there was
this I mean, towards the end of the
conversation when we were talking about
the possibility of like how do you build
up economic resilience
>> Yeah. that requires the participation of
other economies
at the same time that the Trump
administration seems to be pushing a lot
of those other economies and strategic
alliances further away.
You know, so I we didn't get into this,
but obviously, okay, like we don't like
the stock market, it falls a couple
percent and suddenly we get cold feet or
what. Okay, that's economic resilience.
I think there's another issue which we
didn't get into, which is political
appetite for war, you know, especially
after the Iraq war is diminished. The
Iran the current war in Iran is not
popular, pretty clearly, regardless of
whether it's wise or regardless of how
serious the economic toll is. And so, I
think like another interesting and
important dimension here is look around
and I'd be curious like how many Okay,
we could sit here and make the argument,
look, we really need chips or we need to
defend this principle, whatever, etc. Is
there really the domestic political
appetite for massive conflict, etc.? I
don't really know. Even beyond even
beyond the economic question, does the
appetite exist? But, I really enjoyed
that conversation. It was certainly very
interesting you know, hearing him, for
example, walk through the math of how
much oil China has and how much it would
uh be able to how long it would be able
to go with its existing stockpiles. And
it does seem right, this question of
whether there will ever be some sort of
serious change to the to the
China-Taiwan relationship, etc.
And
it's it's a complicated one on many
dimensions as he as he said in the
beginning. On almost almost one of the
most complicated questions there is.
>> absolutely. There's also a fundamental
tension between, you know, the US
building out its chips resilience while
deterring China from doing something in
Taiwan. And if the US actually manages
to be successful in building domestic
capacity, chips capacity, then that like
the silicon shield that's protected
Taiwan gets weaker and weaker, right?
>> We have to start paying attention to
that upcoming Taiwanese election and
start wondering whether the government
in Taiwan will continue to be
enthusiastic about the idea of the US
building up chip capacity. This is a new
uh this is a new dimension of
international relations and so forth
that we have to uh we have to key in on.
You just want to go to Taiwan. I can
>> Well, you know what the one thing I will
say is I do want to go to Taiwan. But,
the one thing I will say is I always
want to learn more about the domestic
policy of other countries. Because I do
think it's very easy to look at the US
and say, okay, here I know a fair amount
about American domestic policy. And then
you hear about like, and here's Taiwan's
policy. Here's Iran's policy. Here's
Israel's policy. Here's Korea's policy.
As if there is just one polity or is
just there is just this one unified
thing. And I think it's important to
remember that all these countries have
domestic politics just like the United
States does.
>> And disagreements and nuances and all of
that. Yep, absolutely. Shall we leave it
there? Let's leave it there. This has
been another episode of the Odd Lots
podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway. You can
follow me at Tracy Alloway. And I'm Joe
Weisenthal. You can follow me at The
Stalwart. Follow our guest, Ike Freiman.
He's at Ike Freiman. Follow our
producers, Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Arman, Dashiel Bennett at Dash Bot,
Caleb Brooks at Caleb Brooks, and Kevin
Lozano at Kevin Lloyd Lozano. And for
more Odd Lots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odd lots for the daily
newsletter and all of our episodes. And
you can chat about all these topics 24/7
in our Discord, discord.gg/odd
lots. And if you enjoy Odd Lots, if you
want us to take [music] a trip to
Taiwan, then please leave us a positive
review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, [music] you can
listen to all of our episodes absolutely
ad-free. All you need to do is find the
Bloomberg channel on Apple Podcasts and
follow the instructions [music] there.
Thanks for listening.
>> [music]
[music]